---
layout: post
title: Introducing Vector-Symbolic Architectures
categories: computing VSA introduction
---

# Introduction

It's my opinion that a collection of techniques for manipulating symbols known collectively as "vector-symbolic architectures" (VSAs) (or equivalently, "hyperdimensional computing", HDC) provide an exciting set of methods for representing
and manipulating information. Much of my own research seeks to utilize properties of VSAs, but in presenting it I find that outside of a small (but growing) community VSAs are not well-known (for instance, in the realm of conventional AI and CS). Several good articles exist to introduce those interested to VSAs - my two favorites are [An Introduction to Hyperdimensional Computing for Robotics](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s13218-019-00623-z) and its companion article [A Comparison of Vector Symbolic Architectures](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2001.11797). These articles do an excellent job of going into the technical details of VSAs, how they can be applied, and the different ways in which they are implemented. 

However, I found that the best way to begin understanding VSAs was to simply begin using them. Many of the core concepts of VSAs are relatively simple to implement and have clear analogs to traditional computer science tools. In this notebook, I include code for computing with one implementation of a VSA, the [Fourier Holographic Reduced Representation (FHRR)](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/377968). 

# A Vector-Symbol

The central processing unit (CPU) of a computer contains specialized hardware to represent and manipulate a certain set of mathematical objects: integers, floating-points, and matrices of these values. Everything a computer handles - from spreadsheets to videos and AI knowledge models - is built using these atomic representations and manipulated with the instruction set of the processor being used. 

As traditional scaling of computer components becomes increasingly challenging, the efficient representation and manipulation of information within a processor is now one of the chief challenges computer manufacturers are looking to improve. This is one motivations behind NVIDIA's 2020 attempt to acquire Arm and the increasing popularity of the novel, open-source RISC-V architecture. 

However, radically different representations of information can offer alternate avenues to provide efficient, high-speed, and reliable computing. A 'symbol' n